
Recall that in Section 1.2 we made a preliminary study of the problem of the vibrating string (with its ends held fixed). In this section we give the full solution of that problem with arbitrary initial position (displacement) and velocity using the method of separation of variables. That is, we solve the boundary value problem for the wave equation that describes the vibrations of a string with fixed ends. The string is assumed to be stretched on the $x$-axis with ends fastened at $x=0$ and $x=L$ (Figure 1 ). Let $u(x, t)$ denote the position at time $t$ of the point $x$ on the string. We saw in the previous section that $u$ satisfies the one dimensional wave equation

$\frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial t^2}=c^2 \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2}, \quad <x<L, t>0$

To find $u$, we will solve this equation subject to the boundary conditions

$(2)$
$u(0, t)=0 \quad$ and $\quad u(L, t)=0$ for all $t>0$
and the initial conditions
$u(x, 0)=f(x) \quad$ and $\quad \frac{\partial u}{\partial t}(x, 0)=g(x)$ for $0<x<x$.

The boundary conditions state that the ends of the string are held fixed for all time, while the initial conditions give the initial shape of the string $f(x)$ and its initial velocity $g(x)$.

We present two solutions of this problem. One is based on a general method called the method of separation of variables. This very powerful method will be used in the solution of many partial differential equations throughout the book. The second solution, due to d'Alembert, expresses $u$ in closed form and leads to interesting geometric interpretations in terms of traveling waves. It will be presented in the next section.

To highlight the principal ideas behind the separation of variables method, we break up the solution into three basic steps.


